Higher Education Learning Agreement for Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20…
Page 1 of 9 GENERAL INFORMATION Trainee1 Last name(s) First name(s) Gender
[Male/Female/Undefined] Date of birth Nacionality2 Level of education (EQF
level) 3 Field of education 4 Name Erasmus code6 Faculty/ Department Country
Address Contact person name7 Phone e-mail: Sending Institution Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) EBARCELO03 Receiving Organization/ Enterprise
Name of host institution Department Address City Country website Size of
organisation/enterprise ☐ <250 employees ☐ >250 employees ☐ Non-profit ☐
Public body Contact person name8 Position Phone e-mail: Mentor name 9 Position
Barcelona School of Informatics (FIB) SPAIN C/Jordi Girona, 1-3 Edifici B6
Campus Nord 08034 Barcelona Carolina Martín +34 93 401 71 16
fib.rel.int@upc.edu Higher Education Learning Agreement for Traineeships
Academic Year 20…/20… Page 2 of 9 BEFORE THE MOBILITY Table A - Traineeship
programme at the Receiving Organisation/Enterprise Planned period of the
physical component: From: To: Number of working hours per week If applicable,
planned period of the virtual component: From: To: [ Traineeship title
Detailed programme of the trainership (including the virtual component, if
applicable): Traineeship in digital skills10 Yes ☐ No ☐ Knowledge, skills and
competences to be acquired by the end of the traineeship (expected Learning
Outcomes): Monitoring plan: (brief description) Evaluation plan: (brief
description) The level of language competence11 in _________________ [indicate
here the main language of work] that the trainee already has or agrees to
acquire by the start of the mobility period is: A1 ☐ A2 ☐ B1 ☐ B2 ☐ C1 ☐ C2 ☐
Native speaker ☐ day/month/year] [day/month/year] [day/month/year]
[day/month/year] Higher Education Learning Agreement for Traineeships Academic
Year 20…/20… Page 3 of 9 Table B – Sending Institution (Please use only one of
the following three boxes)12 1\. The traineeship is embedded in the curriculum
and upon satisfactory completion of the traineeship, the institution
undertakes to: Award ECTS13 credits (or equivalent): Yes ☐ (18 ECTS(TFG) + 12
ECTS(Internship)) No ☐ Give a grade based on: Traineeship certificate ☐ Final
report ☐ Interview ☐ Record the traineeship in the trainee's Transcript of
Records: Yes ☐ No ☐ Record the traineeship in the trainee's Diploma Supplement
(or equivalent): Yes ☐ No ☐ Record the traineeship in the trainee's Europass
Mobility Document: Yes ☐ No ☐ 2\. The traineeship is voluntary and, upon
satisfactory completion of the traineeship, the institution undertakes to:
Award ECTS credits (or equivalent): If yes, please indicate the number of
credits: Give a grade: If yes, please indicate if this will be based on:
Record the traineeship in the trainee's Transcript of Records: Record the
traineeship in the trainee's Diploma Supplement (or equivalent): Record the
traineeship in the trainee's Europass Mobility: 3\. The traineeship is carried
out by a recent graduate and, upon satisfactory completion of the traineeship,
the institution undertakes to: Award ECTS credits (or equivalent): Yes ☐ No ☐
(Not applicable to PhD level) If yes, please indicate the number of credits:
Record the traineeship in the trainee's Europass Mobility Document (highly
recommended): Yes ☐ No ☐ Yes ☐ No ☐ (Not applicable to PhD level) Yes ☐ N o ☐
Traineeship certificate ☐ Final report ☐ Interview ☐ Yes ☐ N o ☐ Yes ☐ N o ☐
Yes ☐ N o ☐ x x x x x x Higher Education Learning Agreement for Traineeships
Academic Year 20…/20… Page 4 of 9 Accident insurance for the trainee (if not
provided by the Receiving Organisation/Enterprise) The Sending Institution
will provide an accident insurance to the trainee: (if not provided by the
Receiving Organisation) Yes ☐ No ☐ If yes, The accident insurance covers:
accidents during travels made for work purposes: Yes ☐ No ☐ accidents on the
way to work and back from work: Yes ☐ No ☐ The Sending Institution will
provide a liability insurance to the trainee: (if not provided by the
Receiving Organisation) Yes ☐ No ☐ Table C – Receiving Organisation/Enterprise
The Receiving Organisation/Enterprise will provide financial support to the
trainee for the traineeship: Yes ☐ No ☐ If yes, amount (EUR/month): The
Receiving Organisation/Enterprise will provide a contribution in kind to the
trainee for the traineeship: Yes ☐ No ☐ If yes, please specify: The Receiving
Organisation/Enterprise will provide appropriate support and equipment to the
trainee. Upon completion of the traineeship, the Organisation/Enterprise
undertakes to issue a Traineeship Certificate within 5 weeks after the end of
the traineeship. Accident insurance for the trainee The Receiving
Organisation/Enterprise will provide an accident insurance to the trainee (if
not provided by the Sending Institution): Yes ☐ No ☐ If yes, the accident
insurance covers: accidents during travels made for work purposes: Yes ☐ No ☐
accidents on the way to work and back from work: Yes ☐ No ☐ The Receiving
Organisation/Enterprise will provide a liability insurance to the trainee (if
not provided by the Sending Institution): Yes ☐ No ☐ x x Higher Education
Learning Agreement for Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20… Page 5 of 9
Commitment By signing this document, the trainee, the beneficiary
organisation, the receiving organisation [and the sending institution, if
different from the beneficiary organisation] confirm that they approve de
learning agreement and that they will comply with all the arrangements agreed
by all parties. The trainee and receiving organisations will communicate to
the sending institution [and beneficiary organisation, if, different from the
sending institution] and the trainee should also commit to what is set out in
the Erasmus+ grant agreement. The sending institution [and the receiving
institution [if the receiving organisation is a higher education institution]
undertake[s] to respect all the principles of the Erasmus Charter for Higher
Education relating to traineeships. Trainee Name signature e-mail Position
Student/Trainee Date Name Signature e-mail Position Date Responsible person at
the Sending Institution Name signature e-mail Position Date Supervisor 16 at
the receiving organisation /enterprise Anna Rio Doval fib.rel.int@upc.edu Vice
dean for International Affairs Higher Education Learning Agreement for
Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20… Page 6 of 9 DURING THE MOBILITY Table A2 –
Exceptional Changes to the traineeship Programme at the Receiving Organisation
(To be approved by e-mail or signature by the student, the responsible person
in the sending institution and the responsible person in the receiving
organisation) Planned period of the mobility: from: to: If applicable, planned
period(s) of the virtual mobility: from: to: Traineeship title: Number of
working hour for Detailed programme of the traineeship period (including the
virtual component, if applicable): Knowledge, skills and competences to be
acquired by the end of the traineeship (expected learning outcomes):
Monitoring plan: Evaluation plan: [day/month/year] [day/month/year]
[day/month/year] [day/month/year] Higher Education Learning Agreement for
Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20… Page 7 of 9 AFTER THE MOBILITY Table D -
Traineeship Certificate by the Receiving Organisation/Enterprise Name of the
trainee: Name of the Receiving Organisation: Sector of the Receiving
Organisation: Address of the Receiving Organisation: City: Country: Website:
Start date and end date of the complete traineeship (incl. virtual component,
if applicable): from: to: [day/month/year] [day/month/year] Start date and end
date of physical component: from: to: [day/month/year] [day/month/year]
Traineeship title: Detailed programme of the traineeship period including
tasks carried out by the trainee (including the virtual component, if
applicable): Knowledge, skills (intellectual and practical) and competences
acquired (achieved Learning Outcomes): Evaluation of the trainee Supervisor at
the Receiving Organisation/Enterprise Name signature Date Higher Education
Learning Agreement for Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20… Page 8 of 9 1 In
case the mobility combines studies and traineeship, the mobility agreement for
studies template should be used and adjusted to fit both activity types. 2
Country to wich the person belongs administratively and that issues the ID
card and/or passport. 3 Level of education: Short cycle (EQF level 5) /
Bachelor or equivalent first cycle (EQF level 6) / Master or equivalent second
cycle (EQF level 7) / Doctorate or equivalent third cycle (EQF level 8). EQF
level codes 5 to 8 are equivalent to ISCED levels 5 to 8. 4 Field of
education: The ISCED-F 2013 search tool available at
http://ec.europa.eu/education/tools/isced-f_en.htm should be used to find the
ISCED 2013 detailed field of education and training that is closest to the
subject of the degree to be awarded to the trainee by the sending Institution.
5 In the case of outgoing mobility, the beneficiaary organisation is the
sending institution. 6 Erasmus code: a unique identifier that every higher
education institution that has been awarded with the Erasmus Charter for
Higher Education (ECHE) receives. It is only applicable to higher education
institutions located in EU Member States and third countries associated to the
programme. 7 Contact person at the sending institution: a person who provides
a link for administrative information and who, depending on the structure of
the higher education institution, may be the departmental coordinator or will
work at the international relations office or equivalent body within the
institution. 8 Contact person at the receiving organisation: a person who can
provide administrative information within the framework of Erasmus+
traineeships. 9 Mentor: the role of the mentor is to provide support,
encouragement and information to the trainee on the life and experience
relative to the organisation/enterprise (culture of the
organisation/enterprise, informal codes and conducts, etc.). Normally, the
mentor should be a different person than the supervisor. 10 Traineeship in
digital skills: any traineeship where trainees receive training and practice
in at least one or more of the following activities: digital marketing (e.g.
social media management, web analytics); digital graphical, mechanical or
architectural design; development of apps, software, scripts, or websites;
installation, maintenance and management of IT systems and networks;
cybersecurity; data analytics, mining and visualisation; programming and
training of robots and artificial intelligence applications. Generic customer
support, order fulfilment, data entry or office tasks are not considered in
this category. 11 Level of language competence: a description of the European
Language Levels (CEFR) is valaible at: https://europass.europa.eu/es/common-
european-framework-reference-language-skills. Higher Education Learning
Agreement for Traineeships Academic Year 20…/20… Page 9 of 9 12 There are
three different provisions for traineeships: 1\. Tranineeships embedded in the
curriculum (counting towards the degree) 2\. Voluntary traineeships (not
obligatory for degree) 3\. Traineeships for recent graduates. 13 ECTS credits
or equivalent: in countries where the "ECTS" system it is not in place. “ECTS”
needs to be replaced in all tables by the name of the equivalent system that
is used and a web link to an explanation to the system should be added. 14
Responsable person at the beneficiary organisation: this person is responsible
for signin the learning agreement, amending it if needed and if the
beneficiary organisaation is the sending institution, is responsible for
recognising the credits and associated learning outcomes on behalf of the
responsible academic body as set out in the learning agreement. The name and
email of the responsible person must be filled in only in case it differs from
that the contact person mentioned at the top of the document. 15 Responsible
person at the sending institution: this person is responsible for signing the
learning agreement, amending it if needed and if the beneficiary organisation
is not the sending institution, is responsible for recognising the credits and
associated learning outcomes on behalf of the responsible academic body as set
out in the learning agreement. The name and email of the responsible person
must be filled in only in case it differs from that of the responsible person
at the beneficiary organisation. 16 Supervisor at the Receiving Organisation:
this person is responsible for signing the learning agreement, amending it if
needed, supervising the trainee during the traineeship and signing the
Traineeship Certificate. The name and email of the supervisor must be filled
in only in case it differs from that of the contact person mentioned at the
top of the document.

