SUSTAINABILITY REPORT FOR THE BACHELOR THESIS IMPORTANT NOTE: THE EVALUATION
OF THE SUSTAINABILITY REPORT WILL NOT DEPEND ON THE DEGREE OF SUSTAINABILITY
OF THE PROJECT, BUT ON YOUR CAPACITY TO ANALYZE ITS SUSTAINABILITY. 1\.
Introduction The sustainability report is a common requirement, nowadays
mandatory, for IT companies and their projects. Prestigious organizations such
as the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the UN Sustainable development
Knowledge Platform, or Electronics Watch, measure the sustainability of the
products and services of these companies. Thus, for example, the GRI
organization defines standards for reporting the impact of a project on
climate change, human rights, transparency or quality of life, among other
aspects. The GRI Standards are a good tool to publicly report the economic,
environmental and social impacts of an organization. The sustainability
reports of different companies can be found in1. Find an IT company related to
your project. You will find that virtually all major companies publish their
sustainability reports annually. All BS Theses presented at the FIB must
include a chapter entitled "Sustainability Report" in their final report. The
present document provides a set of guidelines to help students to elaborate
this report. A part of the report must also be presented in GEP course. 2\.
The sustainability matrix The sustainability report will be based on the
application of the sustainability matrix presented in Figure 1. The analysis
of the sustainability of a project is divided into three parts, identified by
the columns of the matrix:  Project development (PD), which includes the
planning, making and implementation of the project.  Exploitation of the
project, which starts once it has been implemented and ends with its
dismantling.  The risks inherent to the project itself throughout its
construction, exploitation and dismantling. PD Exploitation Risks
Environmental Consumption of the design Ecological footprint Environmental
Economic Invoice Viability plan Economic Social Personal impact Social impact
Social Figure 1. Sustainability matrix for the BS thesis 1
http://database.globalreporting.org/search/ 1 Each of the columns must be
analyzed from three points of view: environmental, economic and social, the
three dimensions of sustainability. When we talk about risks –not unforeseen
events– we are referring to those variables that we can identify but cannot
control. Unforeseen events, however, cannot be anticipated in most cases, and
therefore will not be taken into account in the sustainability report. It is
considered a risk, for example, if a mobile application for online sales is
designed and the competitors decide to take our idea with a similar
initiative. On the other hand, it would be an unforeseen event if a state law,
without any prior notice, prohibited sales through the Internet starting next
week. In case that the media had already been talking about its possible
approval, it would no longer be an unforeseen event but a risk. The meaning of
each cell in the matrix is :  Environmental/ PD cell : represents the impact
on the environment throughout the completion of the BS thesis (energy
consumption and waste generation). It can be measured, for example, in kWh and
tons of CO2 emissions involved in carrying out the thesis.  Environmental/
Exploitation cell : represents the ecological footprint that the project will
have throughout its life. It can be measured with the same parameters as the
previous cell.  Environmental/Risk s Cell: r epresents the set of
eventualities that could cause the environmental impact of the project to be
more negative than expected.  Economic/DP Cell: represents the consumption of
resources (material and human) made during the development of the entire
project and the cost of these resources. It would be the equivalent of the
invoice that would be charged to a potential client of the project and
requires carrying out a detailed temporary planning of the BS thesis. 
Economic/ Exploitation cell: represents the project’s viability plan. In the
case of a BS thesis, this plan will be presented in a very simplified form. 
Economic/Risk Cell: represents the set of contingencies that could cause the
project to take longer than expected to reach viability, or even never become
profitable.  Social Cell/DP: represents the impact that carrying out the
project has had on the people who have worked on it. Given that it is
difficult to quantify this impact, try to indicate how the project has changed
you and your closest environment.  Social Cell/ Exploitation : represents the
impact the project will have on the different groups that could be affected,
either directly or indirectly. It is difficult to quantify; indicate your
reflections on the possible effects of your project.  Social Cell/Risks:
represents all the eventualities that could lead to the project having a more
negative social impact on one of the related groups than forecast in the
project report. 2 Normally, the scope of a BS thesis will be narrower than
that of an engineering project, as shown in figure 2. In any case, the maximum
scope of an engineering project (and that of a BS thesis) goes as far as its
implementation. However, the report must include a set of reflections related
to its exploitation and the associated risks. The challenge of trying to
foresee what may happen helps the student to get the acquisition of a
strategic vision. Figure 2. BS thesis scope 3\. Questions that students should
ask themselves To prepare the sustainability report, we suggest that you ask
yourself a set of questions that you should answer in the corresponding
chapter of the report. Figure 3 shows these questions. Row "I" of each
dimension of sustainability corresponds to the questions that you must ask
yourself in the GEP course (Initial Milestone of the thesis), while row "F"
contains the questions that you must ask yourself while you are carrying out
the project, whose answers should be included in the "sustainability report"
(Final Milestone of the thesis). Not all the questions make sense for all
types of projects, You should consider which of the questions make sense for
your BS thesis and which ones don’t. You should also consider (and discuss in
the sustainability analysis) which questions other than those included in this
document would be relevant to your project. In-depth reflection on the
sustainability of your BS thesis will probably reveal both positive and
negative consequences. However, in no case, negative consequences on the
sustainability of your project will lead to a negative assessment of either
your sustainability analysis or your BS thesis. 3 Figure 3. Questions in the
sustainability matrix (I: initial milestone, F: final milestone) DP 3.1.
Environmental impact study In this section you should estimate the
environmental resources that your project will use. A relatively simple way is
to calculate the consumption of your project in kWh. You can also estimate the
waste generated in Tm of CO2 equivalent. In the Initial Milestone (GEP) you
must estimate the environmental resources that will be consumed in the design
of your project, while in the Final Milestone (Sustainability Report) you must
consider the environmental resources – ecological footprint – that your
project will consume during its exploitation. You should also explain how
others solve the problem you want to address (state of the art). In other
words, explain what solutions that are currently available and, from an
environmental point of view, the problem/need you aim to tackle. You should
also estimate how your solution will be environmentally better than existing
ones. In the Final Milestone you must estimate the "environmental risks". That
is, answer questions such as: Could situations occur that would increase the
ecological footprint of the project? Explain potential situations that you
cannot address due to lack of time, resources or ability that could lead to an
increase of the ecological footprint. 3.2. Economic impact study This section
presents the questions you should ask yourself regarding the economic
viability of your project. We do not propose you to prepare an exhaustive
analysis of viability, returns on investment, funding or other issues that
should be considered in a Master's thesis. In the Initial Milestone you should
estimate the cost of the project/Invoice (and include a detailed planning).
Specifically, during the Initial Milestone you must answer the questions
corresponding to the two rows of the matrix labeled "project invoice" and
"viability plan". In the Final Milestone (Sustainability Report) you should
present, in addition to the calculation of the project design invoice, the
analysis of the deviations with respect to the initial approach, if they have
occurred. In the Final Milestone you should also reflect about the "economic
risks". In other words, reflect on whether some situations that affect the
viability of the project may happen. Explain possible scenarios that you have
not taken into account due to lack of time, resources or ability, which could
jeopardize the economic viability of your project. 3.3. Social impact study
Questions referring to the social impact should be focused on considering the
implications that the realization of your project may have on society. To
answer the questions of the Initial Milestone and the Final Milestone proposed
in the matrix, you should identify the groups affected by the problem/need
that you intend to address. The groups related to a project could be:
owners/managers, workers, suppliers, consumers (direct users) or others
(indirect or passive users). For example, in car sharing apps, the
owner/manager maintains the app, the direct users are the driver and
passengers, and other affected people could be taxi drivers, that is adversely
affected by the reduction in their turnover. The social implications of a BS
thesis are very diverse depending on the type of project, and generally, they
are difficult to forecast and quantify. You can observe this enormous
diversity in the real indicators of social sustainability in the GRI
standards2. 2 https://www.globalreporting.org/standards/gri-standards-
download-center/ 5 As a guidance, below are some considerations that are
generally relevant to the type of BS theses carried out at the FIB. These
could help you to answer the questions proposed in the sustainability matrix.
 Who did the work that your product will do now? Are there jobs at risk? Were
they decent jobs? Was it routine work? Will work quality be gained?  Have you
taken into account the usability of your product for people with special needs
(elderly people, visual impairment, disabilities...)?  Have you assessed the
project's implications in terms of privacy of user data, image rights, etc.?
Can your product put someone in a vulnerable situation?  To what extent do
you estimate that your project will increase or decrease social inequality? 
Does the project have direct application in public administration? Could it
provide any service to the citizens? Have you considered the implications of
using free or proprietary software? Is the final product conceived as a
proprietary product, or a product for shared use? When considering the social
risks, explain possible situations (that you cannot address due to lack of
time, resources or ability) that could adversely affect the people related
with your project (users, investors, workers, suppliers, etc.). 4\.
Conclusions According to data published in the KPMG Survey of Corporate
Responsibility Reporting, in 2020, 93% of the world's leading companies
compiled the corresponding sustainability reports corresponding the
ecological, economic and social areas. This document presents a method for
carrying out the sustainability report of a BS thesis. However, given the
diverse nature of the BS theses at the FIB, if the student prefers to organize
their sustainability report in a different way than the one proposed here,
they can do so as long as it results in a good analysis. The committee will
assess your project using a rubric3. As a student, you must ensure that the
organization of the "sustainability report" chapter of your thesis meets the
criteria specified in this rubric. 3 The rubric is available to the public and
can be found on the FIB website. http://www.fib.upc.edu/es/estudiar-
enginyeria-informatica/treball-final-grau/indicadors.html 6

